# FAQ

## Isn't Bitcoin useless anyway?

tl;dr: No. Hundreds of millions of people worldwide are finding it useful for a
lot of different use cases. It's a pretty arrogant stance to assume you know
better than all of them.

Here's a [thread](https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1340836877595594752.html)
by [Alex Gladstein](https://twitter.com/gladstein) of the [Human Rights
Foundation](https://hrf.org/) enumerating humanitarian causes that Bitcoin has
been useful for. [As a prominent
example](https://web.archive.org/web/20201108012753/https://www.forbes.com/sites/rogerhuang/2019/04/26/how-bitcoin-and-wikileaks-saved-each-other/),
Wikileaks probably wouldn't exist anymore if it wasn't for Bitcoin enabling
donations for them when the US government pressured other payment providers into
blocking them.

Bitcoin can be seen as a circuit breaker or relief valve for financial systems
everywhere. It gives people a way to circumvent financial censorship, capital
controls or inflation, and it enables permissionless access to an alternative
financial system. It cannot discriminate against people for whatever reason.

If you find that useless for yourself, you should call yourself lucky.

## I have read somewhere that every Bitcoin transaction is ["equivalent to the power consumption of an average U.S. household over 22.86 days."](https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption). Is that true? Isn't that horrible?

tl;dr: Most people don't value Bitcoin as a payment mechanism, and even if they
were, most payments are not recorded on-chain. So calculating the energy cost of
a transaction is as impossible and nonsensical as it would be for gold.

It's true in a similar way that [the lack of pirates is causing global
warming](https://www.forbes.com/sites/erikaandersen/2012/03/23/true-fact-the-lack-of-pirates-is-causing-global-warming/?sh=508707043a67).
Yes, this is a valid estimation of Bitcoin mining's energy use divided by a
valid estimation of on-chain transactions, compared to a probably valid
estimation of household electricity use.

However, connecting these three figures in this way doesn't yield any insight
beyond shock and awe. That's because Bitcoin's primary value is not as a payment
network, so the number of on-chain transactions is not an interesting metric for
it. This can be seen easily: On one hand the [number of onchain
transactions](https://bitinfocharts.com/comparison/bitcoin-transactions.html)
has always been limited --- and that limit has been pretty much hit constantly
since at least 2019. On the other hand, the value of Bitcoin, as well as the
estimated number of its users, has been rising over many orders of magnitude
since 2009. How can this be possible?

  * In recent years, long term storage of value has become Bitcoin's main use
    case. That is, people use it more for storing their savings than for paying
    for goods and services.
  * Its current usage is thus more comparable to gold, which is also rarely used
    in transactions. I have never seen anybody calculate the energy cost of gold
    mining plus handling divided by the number of physical gold shipments.
    Probably because that's as misleading a number as the equivalent in Bitcoin.
  * Just as with gold, there are ways to make even small transactions quickly
    and cheaply with Bitcoin. Most real-world transactions use one of these
    off-chain methods. Probably the most popular today are custodial services
    like exchanges. Sending bitcoin from one customer to another on a service
    like this just requires changing two numbers in their database and is the
    equivalent of gold in a bank changing owners. It's hard to say how many such
    transactions there are, since there are many "bitcoin banks" and their
    numbers are proprietary, but it's safe to say they dwarf on-chain
    transactions by orders of magnitude.
  * Unlike gold, there are methods of transacting Bitcoin off-chain that require
    less trust in intermediaries, such as the Lightning Network or Blockstream's
    Liquid federation. With a growing demand in transactions, such alternatives
    are refined and gain popularity, without this being reflected in the above
    numbers. With the Lightning Network, it's even difficult to estimate how
    many transactions are being performed, since there is no central ledger
    recording them all.
  
    
   

## Will Bitcoin boil the oceans?

tl;dr: No. It does use a lot of energy and this also leads to a lot of Co2
emissions. See the current best estimates on how much
[here](https://netpositive.money/calculator). It's hard to predict how this will
develop in the future, but it will not grow exponentially forever.

## Can't we just change Bitcoin?
  
tl;dr: No. Bitcoin's most cherished value proposition is its resistance to
changing central economic properties. Proof-of-work is an important economic
principle, even if there were a technical alternative. But most importantly,
there aren't any known alternatives with similar properties.

## Can't we just ban Bitcoin?

No. It was designed to withstand opposition from state level adversaries.
Banning it would require a global totalitarian regime. Do you really want that?

## How could Bitcoin be a net positive force for the environment? 

tl;dr: It could help finance renewable energy developments, incentivize people
to save instead of spend, and maybe even be the foundation of a more sustainable
economic system.

## If Bitcoin could be eventually helpful against climate change, why do you want to do anything at all?
  
Notice the COULD. It means these visions are both uncertain and certainly not
true today. Climate change is a problem today and needs to be addressed ASAP.
Even if Bitcoiners' visions of a better world through better money come true, it
certainly won't be overnight, and it might be too late. In the meantime, there
is no question that Bitcoin mining does contribute to climate change today.
That's why we want to act now.  

## How could we help fight against climate change?
  
Bitcoin is money. Bitcoiners --- hodlers, miners, exchanges, businesses --- are
making money. Money can help solve problems. So we want to encourage you to give
some of that money to causes that you believe can make a difference in the fight
against climate change. And tell us about it, so we can count it, and one day
tell the world that we are sure that Bitcoin is a net positive money.
  
## Where can I donate?

We do not want to take your money. In the spirit of Bitcoin, this is a voluntary
and decentralized effort. So ideally, you select the cause and the amount you
want to give, estimate the amount of Co2 offset, and report that to us, as
anonymously or publicly as you want. In order to make that easier for you, we've
curated a list of charities that we believe are helpful and that work with us to
automatically report the numbers so we can measure our impact as bitcoiners. And
we have made the [calculator page](https://netpositive.money/calculator) to give
you an idea of how much Co2 you might want to offset.

In general, we'd recommend indexing risk by donating (as a community) to a wide
array of initiatives with different approaches. You can just select those that
you find most appealing. If they aren't on our list, just contact us to let us
know that you want to give to them. If they meet our standards for inclusion,
we'll gladly add your contribution to the total and maybe even add them to our
recommendation list.

## How much money are we talking about?

Looking at the [calculator page](https://netpositive.money/calculator), the
current estimate of total Co2 emitted by bitcoin mining in its lifetime is close
to 100 Mt. Classical offsetting measures or carbon credits would price this at
about \$20 per ton of Co2 or \$2 billion. Which is less than 0.4% of the current
value of all bitcoins in existence, or about $120 per Bitcoin.

However, as you can see on our list of charities, there are initiatives that
promise a much higher impact per dollar invested, to the tune of far less than
\$1 per ton of Co2. These tend to be a little more speculative in nature, in
that there is more variance in the expected amount offset, which should be OK if
we don't put all our eggs in one basket.

So it does seem reasonable that we might reach our goal of Bitcoin being a
certified net positive money with less than \$100 million in total donations.
Which is less than 0.02% of the value of all bitcoins, or about $6 per Bitcoin.

Annual figures tend to be at about a third of the total lifetime amount at the
current growth rate.

## Is that a lot?

Not really, considering that fiat money is losing value at a rate of at least 2%
per year. Or that Bitcoiners are already giving [\$300 million per
year](https://www.thegivingblock.com/) to nonprofits.

